Kishore
:www.linkedin.com/in/kishore-krishna -
Professional Summary: 
 Accomplished Data Scientist with over
advanced machine learning , specializing in extracting actionable insights from complex datasets across 
Insurance , Consulting , and E-commerce 
 Developed and deployed supervised
Clustering ) using Python, Scikit-Learn
to improve model accuracy and business KPIs
 Developed and fine-tuned Large Language Models
(RLHF). 
 Built and deployed predictive models in recommendation systems, utilizing 
XGBoost to enhance accuracy in insurance premium calculators. Additionally, implemented 
Augmented Generation  (RAG) systems for LLM 
generation . 
 Collaborative problem solver, Proactive
through data-driven solutions, leveraging
project turnaround time .
 Proactively tackled c omplex business challenges with analytical thinking, leveraging data
develop innovative solutions that enhance efficiency and performance.
 
Work Experience: 
Company: Devzen Software Solutions Pvt,  
Role: Associate Data Scientist  
Roles & Responsibilities: 
 Designed and deployed a RAG- based AI Knowledge Assistant, integrating OpenAI GPT
for document- based semantic search 
 Developed a personalized recommendation engine using historical purchases, repeated offers (similarity score), 
and profiling-based micro- segmentation
 Built champion XGBoost model with custom features and bundled offers using affinity 
entropy. 
 Engineered rolling, demographic, and dynamic segments using PCA and K
targeting. 
 Engineered rolling, demographic, and dynamic segments using PCA and K
targeting. 
 Led end-to- end ML lifecycle implementation in an Agile team, collaborating with cross
participating in sprint planning, demos, and retrospectives. 
 Mentored junior data professionals, contributing to internal knowledge
Kishore Krishna Moka 
Associate Data Scientist 
-moka ✉:kishoremoka97@gmail.com
✆: +91
over 3+ years of experience, proficient in Python and
, specializing in extracting actionable insights from complex datasets across 
commerce domains.
supervised  and unsupervised  machine learning models ( Regression
Learn, and XGBoost, effectively handling both structured and unstructured data 
business KPIs . 
Large Language Models  (LLMs) using Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback 
Built and deployed predictive models in recommendation systems, utilizing RFM, PCA
to enhance accuracy in insurance premium calculators. Additionally, implemented 
(RAG) systems for LLM fine-tuning , optimizing  contextual
Proactive  learner, collaborating with cross-functional teams
leveraging  Python and SQL for data analysis, resulting in
omplex business challenges with analytical thinking, leveraging data
develop innovative solutions that enhance efficiency and performance.  
 Ltd 
 
based AI Knowledge Assistant, integrating OpenAI GPT -4 and Azure Blob Storage 
based semantic search and intelligent Q&A.  
Developed a personalized recommendation engine using historical purchases, repeated offers (similarity score), 
segmentation . 
Built champion XGBoost model with custom features and bundled offers using affinity 
Engineered rolling, demographic, and dynamic segments using PCA and K -Means to drive hyper personalized 
Engineered rolling, demographic, and dynamic segments using PCA and K -Means to drive hyper personalized 
end ML lifecycle implementation in an Agile team, collaborating with cross
participating in sprint planning, demos, and retrospectives.  
Mentored junior data professionals, contributing to internal knowledge -sharing sessionskishoremoka97@gmail.com  
+91-8897531533 
and SQL, and 
, specializing in extracting actionable insights from complex datasets across 
Regression , Classification , 
, effectively handling both structured and unstructured data 
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback 
PCA, t-SNE, DBSCAN, and 
to enhance accuracy in insurance premium calculators. Additionally, implemented Retrieval-
contextual  relevance  and response 
teams to drive innovation 
in a 25% reduction in 
omplex business challenges with analytical thinking, leveraging data -driven insights to 
 April2022– Present 
4 and Azure Blob Storage 
Developed a personalized recommendation engine using historical purchases, repeated offers (similarity score), 
Built champion XGBoost model with custom features and bundled offers using affinity scoring and Shannon 
to drive hyper personalized 
to drive hyper personalized 
end ML lifecycle implementation in an Agile team, collaborating with cross -functional teams and 
sharing sessions . 
Technical Skills: 
 Programming Languages:  Python, SQL 
 Classic ML Algos: Linear Regression, Logistic Regression, SVM, XGBoost, Decision Trees, K-means Random 
Forest, PCA, KNN. 
 Advance ML Algos:  Transformers, NLP. 
 Data Visulazation: PowerBI, MatplotLib, Seaborn. 
 Statistical Analysis 
 Frameworks & Libraries: Pandas, Numpy, Sci-kit learn, Lang chain. 
 Gen AI,RAG Architecture, Azure Open Ai, Lang chain 
 
Projects: 
  
RAG Based AI Knowledge Assistant 
Tech Stacks: Python, Sentence Transformers , PyMuPDF , OpenAI GPT-4 , VSCode, Git  
 Developed a Retrieval-Augmented Generation  (RAG) pipeline that intelligently answers user queries 
using enterprise documents.  
 Ingested and parsed HTML/PDF files, extracting key metadata  like keywords , intent categories , named 
entities, and summaries  using LLMs. 
 Transformed extracted content into vector embeddings  using Sentence  Transformers  and indexed them 
via FAISS for semantic search. 
 Integrated Azure OpenAI  / Open Source LLMs with LangChain  to augment user queries with top-
matching document context before generating answers. 
 Designed intent-aware pipelines  that filter and retrieve documents based on confidence scores  and 
intent classification . 
 Achieved modular design  with clear separation for keyword extraction, summarization, NER, 
embedding, and retrieval layers. 
 
LLM Specialist – RLHF Trainer (Turing) 
Tech Stacks: Python, SpaCy, NLTK, AWS, Machine Learning, NLP   
 Spearheaded the training and fine-tuning of Large Language Models  (LLMs) using Reinforcement 
Learning with Human Feedback  (RLHF), optimizing model alignment with user expectations and ethical 
AI standards.  
 Engineered high-quality, domain-specific training datasets and implemented iterative reward modeling 
frameworks  to enhance generative accuracy and reduce hallucination rates.  
 Conducted hyper parameter optimization  and integrated advanced fine-tuning methodologies , 
ensuring scalable deployment of robust LLM systems.  
 Collaborated with multidisciplinary teams to benchmark and evaluate model performance using custom 
achieving measurable improvements in output relevance and coherence. 
 
Recommendation Systems 
Tech Stacks: Python, AWS, PCA, TSNE, DBSCAN   
 Developed and optimized recommendation systems using RFM analysis, and XGBoost models to 
personalize product suggestions as Favorite products.  
 Developed and optimized an MVP recommendation system using RFM analysis , PCA, t-SNE, and K-
Means++  clustering to segment customers based on digital activity and purchasing behavior.  
 Designed and implemented repeated offers  and bundle creation strategies , improving customer 
engagement  and increasing sales conversion rate.  
 Built segment-based recommendations leveraging machine learning models ( XGBoost, K-Means, and 
collaborative filtering ) for targeted product suggestions. 
 Created behavioral segments  based on digital activity and product purchase behavior segmentation to 
classify customers effectively. 
 Developed targeted recommendations for each segment, enhancing user experience and boosting 
retention rate 
 
Education: 
 
 Bachelor’s Degree in Electrical And Electronics Engineering from Andhra University (2014-2018)