C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 12.12.2019
CORAM:
THE HON OURABLE M R.JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM 
C.M.P.No.443 of 2019
in
A.S.No.SR123666 of 2018
J.Mythili     ...Appellant
Vs..
Abdul Razak               ...Respondent
Civil Miscellaneous Petition filed under Order 41 Rule 3(A) of 
C.P.C., 1908 to condone the delay of 1435 days in filing the Appeal Suit 
against the judgement and decree dated 31.10.2014 in O.S.No.11599 
of 2010 on the file of the City Civil Court, Chennai.
For Petitioner : Mrs.J.Mythili, Party in Person
 
For Respondent    : No appearance
ORDER
 This Civil Miscellaneous Petition is filed to condone the delay of 
1435 days in filing the Appeal Suit against the judgement and decree 
dated 31.10.2014 in O.S.No.11599 of 2010.
1/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
2.The defendant in the suit is the petitioner/appellant herein and 
the suit was instituted by the respondent for declaration of right and 
title of the suit property in favour of the plaintiff, for declaring sale deed 
dated 13.04.1989, Settlement Deed  dated 11.07.1994 and another 
Settlement Deed  dated 13.03.1995 as ex-facie, illegal and invalid ab-
initio, for permanent injunction restraining the defendant from in any 
way encumbering, alienating, dealing with the suit property in any 
manner and direct the defendant to pay Rs.1,44,000/- for damages, for 
rent from September, 2009 and also damages to the tune of 12 months 
from the date of plaint till the date of vacating the suit property.
3.The suit was decreed in favour of the respondent/plaintiff and 
the present Civil Miscellaneous Petition is filed to condone the delay of 
1435 days in filing the Appeal Suit against the said judgment and 
decree.
4.The affidavit filed in support of the Miscellaneous Petition 
reveals that the suit building was purchased by R.Janarthanam, the 
father of the petitioner/appellant through sale deed dated 13.04.1989 
registered as Doc.No.645 of 1989 in the Office of the Sub Registrar, 
2/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
Mylapore. The petitioner states that her father R.Janarthanam is in 
absolute possession of the property and subsequently the father of the 
petitioner settled the suit property in favour of the petitioner through 
two settlement deeds dated 11.07.1994 and 13.03.1995. 
Subsequently, the petitioner became the absolute owner of the suit 
property and is in enjoyment. 
5.Except by stating these facts, the petitioner has not furnished 
any reason for condoning the huge delay of 1435 days in filing the 
Appeal Suit, not even a single ground has been stated for condoning 
the enormous delay. Contrarily, the facts in short are narrated which 
are all not necessa ry for the purpose of condoning the delay of 1435 
days. In the absence of valid reasons, the Courts cannot condone the 
enormous delay of 1435 days in filing the Appeal suit. The Law of 
Limitation is substantial. Thus, the Rule is to follow the Law of 
Limitation and condonation of delay being an excep tion is to be 
exercised cautiously and only in the presence of valid reasons, such 
huge delay can be condoned and not otherwise. In the absence of any 
valid reasons, Courts cannot condone the huge delay of 1435 days in 
filing the Appeal Suit. 
3/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
6.In such circumstances, the delay is to be construed as 
uncondonable and therefore, Courts are bound to see the reasons and 
its genuineness so as to condone the huge delay. The legal principles in 
the matter of condonation of delay is considered by this Court in the 
case of A.Edwin Raj Vs. A.Ruban David in M.P.No.1 of 2015 in 
A.S.SR.No.52108 of 2015 and the relevant paragraphs are extracted 
herein;
“4. The legal principles to be followed for condoning 
the delay is well settled and this Court also considered the 
said principles in C.M.P.Nos.8358 & 8359 of 2018 in 
AS.SR.No.32087 of 2018 dated 09.12.2019 and the 
relevant paragraphs are extracted as under:
“10. In respect of said contentions, the 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent cited the judgment of this Court in the 
case of Zulaiha Syed Mohideen Vs. D.Visalakshi 
Amma l & Others  reported in 
MANU/TN/2222/2013, wherein the Court made 
following observations; 
“5.Before going into the merits of the case, first of 
all, it should be stated that in a case of this nature 
for condonation of delay, it is well settled that 
4/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
length of delay is not material, but the reasons 
stated thereof for condonation of delay. In other 
words, for condonation of delay, the reasons 
adduced must be properly pleaded, convincing and 
acceptable and explanation should be offered for 
condonation of the delay. Unless proper explanation 
is offered, the Courts could not exercise its 
discretion in the proper perspective to advance 
substantial justice. It is also settled that when a 
court has exercised its discretionary power to 
condone the delay, the appellate Court, in exercise 
of its discretion, should not ordinarily interfere with 
such decision unless the discretion exercised is 
arbitrary and overlooking the interest accrued to 
another party to the dispute. The appellate Court 
should also see whether the trial court has taken 
into consideration all the aspects of the matter, the 
advantage or disadvantage that may be caused to 
the other side while condoning the delay inasmuch 
as during the interregnum, the other party could 
have asserted a vested right. With this background, 
let us analyse the merits of the rival contentions 
urged by the counsel for both sides.
6 to 11.......
12.On behalf of the revision petitioner, 
several decisions were cited. The learned counsel 
for the
5/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
respondents objected for relying on the decisions 
by stating that they relate to condonation of delay 
in filing a petition and not with respect to 
condonation of delay in re-presenting a petition. 
Such an argument of the counsel for the 
respondents cannot be countenanced. Each and 
every case depends on the facts and circumstances 
of that case. Further, the issue involved in this case 
is whether the delay in filing a petition has been 
properly explained and sufficient cause has been 
shown for the delay or not and in support of the 
same, the learned counsel for the revision 
petitioner has relied on the following decisions:-
(i) In (Kandaswamy and four others vs. 
Krishnamandiram Trust, Karur, by its Trustees and 
33 others) 2001 (4) CTC 722 this Court took note 
of the fact that the conduct of the revision 
petitioner in keeping quite for over two years only 
on account of inability to mobilise other petitioner 
evidences would amount to gross negligence, 
irresponsible inactive attitude and therefore the 
petitioner lacks bonafides. Under those 
circumstances, this Court refused to condone the 
delay of 797 days in filing a petition to set aside the 
exparte decree. In the above case, this Court also 
referred to the decision of the Honourable Supreme 
Court reported in (M.K Prasad vs. P. Arumugam) 
6/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
(2001) 6 Supreme Court Cases 176, which was 
relied on by the learned counsel for the 
respondents 
(ii) In (Sundar Gnanaolivu rep. by his power 
of attorney agent Mr. Rukmini vs. Rajendran 
Gnanavolivu, rep. by its power of attorney agent 
Veina Gnanavalivu) 2003 1 Law Weekly 585, the 
Division Bench of this Court held that when the 
averments in the affidavit are untrue, lacks bona 
fides, then the case falls within the excep tion to the 
Rule of Liberal approach and it does not deserve 
the liberal approach formula in matters relating to 
condonation of delay. In this case also, the Division 
Bench of this Court followed the decision of the 
Honourable Supreme Court reported in (M.K Prasad 
vs. P. Arumugam) (2001) 6 Supreme Court Cases 
176, which was relied on by the learned counsel for 
the respondents. In Para Nos. 14-A and 15, the 
Division Bench of this Court held thus:-
14-A. In yet another Division Bench Judgment 
reported in (1990) 1 LLN 457 (Tamil Nadu 
Mercantile Bank Limited, Tuticorin versus Appellate 
Authority under the Tamil Nadu Shops and 
Establishments Act, Madurai and another) the 
principles relating to Rule of limitation have been 
discussed and the legal position has been stated by 
His Lordship Mr. Justice M. Srinivasan, as he then 
7/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
was, in paragraphs 14 and 17, which read as 
under:-
"14. .....If a litigant chooses to approach the 
Court long after the time prescribed under the 
relevant provisions of the law, he cannot say that 
no prejudice would be caused to the other side by 
the delay being condoned. The other side would 
have in all probability destroyed the records 
thinking that the records would not be relevant as 
there was no further proceeding in the matter. 
Hence, to view a matter of condonation of delay, 
with a presupposition that no prejudice will be 
caused by the condonation of delay to the 
respondent in that application will be fallacious. In 
our view, each has to be decided on the facts and 
circumstances of the case. Length of the delay is a 
relevant matter to be taken into account, while 
considering whether the delay should be condoned 
or not. It is not open to any litigant to fix his own 
period of limitation for instituting proceedings for 
which law has prescribed periods of limitation.
"17. .....Once it is held that a party has lost 
his right to have the matter considered on merits 
because of his own inaction for a long time, it 
cannot be presumed to be non-deliberate delay, 
and in such circumstances of the case, he cannot 
be heard to plead that substantial justice deserved 
8/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
to be preferred as against technical considerations. 
WE are of the view that the question of limitation is 
not merely a technical consideration. Rules of 
limitation are based on principles of sound public 
policy and principles of equity. Is a litigant liable to 
have a  Damocles' sword hanging over his head 
indefinitely for a period to be determined at the 
whims and fancies of the opponent (underlining is 
ours)
15. On a conspectus reading of the above 
principles set out in the various judgments, it is 
well settled that a liberal approach should be 
extended while considering the application for 
condonation of delay. Sufficient caution has been 
exhibited to note that wherever there is lack of 
bona fides or attempt of hood-wink the Court by 
the party concerned who has come forward with an 
application for condonation of delay, in such cases, 
no indulgence should be shown by condoning the 
delay applied for. It is also clear to the effect that it 
is not the number of days of delays that matters, 
but the attitude of the party which caused the 
delay. In other words when the Court finds that the 
party who failed to approach the Court within the 
time stipulated comes forward with an explanation 
for condoning the delay, the Court if satisfied that 
the delay occasioned not due to the deliberate 
9/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
conduct of the party, but due to any other reason, 
then by sufficiently compensating the prejudice 
caused to the other side monetarily, the 
condonation of delay can be favourably ordered."
(iii) In the decision of this Court reported in 
(G. Jayaraman vs. Devarajan) 2007 (2) CTC 643, 
this Court held in a case where there was a delay of 
553 days in filing an application to set aside the 
decree that discretion must not be exercised in an 
arbitrary or vague manner but must be exercised 
with vigilance and circumspection. It was further 
held that delay cannot be condoned as a matter of 
judicial generosity and the right accrued to the 
other side ought to be kept in view while 
considering the plea relating to affording 
opportunity to advance substantial justice. The 
facts involved in that case is identical to the facts of 
the case on hand. In that case, the decree holder 
was prevented from  enjoying the fruits of the 
decree for about 8 years because of the filing of 
one petition after the other by the defendants to 
successf ully stall the execu tion of the decree. In 
that context, this Court held that liberal approach 
theory would cause prejudice to the plaintiff/decree 
holder and the discretion exercised by the trial 
court to condone the delay of 553 days cannot be 
sustained. In Para Nos. 9, 10 and 16, this Court 
10/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
held as follows:-
"9. Of course, it is the consistent view taken 
by the Supreme Court in various decisions that 
"sufficient cause" appearing in Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act should be liberally considered and 
the Court should be slow in shutting the door of 
justice to a litigant on the score of limitation. When 
the reason for the delay is properly explained, the 
Court is to adopt a pragmatic approach to condone 
the delay when there is no negligence, inaction or 
want of bona fide on the part of the Applicant.
10. At the same time, the discretion must be 
exercised in any arbitrary or vague or fanciful 
manner, but must be exercised like any other 
judicial discretion with vigilance and 
circumspection. Delay cannot be condoned as a 
matter of judicial generosity. Where delay could 
have been avoided by due care and caution, the 
Court may not exercise the discretion to condone 
the delay. 
16. As stated earlier, delay cannot be 
excused as a matter of judicial generosity. 
Rendering substantial justice is not to cause 
prejudice to the opposite party. Money suit was 
filed way back in 1998 and Revision 
petitioner/plaintiff has been pursuing the matter for 
11/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
nearly 7 to 8 years. The matter could not reach 
finality because of one Application or other filed by 
the respondent/Defendant. The party claiming 
indulgence must prove that he is reasonably 
diligent in prosecuting the matter. This test for 
condoning the delay is not satisfied in this case. 
Liberal exercise of jurisdiction under Section 5 of 
the Act would cause prejudice to the 
plaintiff/Decree holder, who has been pursuing the 
money suit for quite a long time. In condoning the 
delay, there is improper exercise of discretion, and 
therefore, the impugned order cannot be 
sustained."
(iv) In (Shanmugam vs. Chokkalingam) 2009 
(5) CTC 48 this Court held that the petitioner 
therein do not deserve indulgence inasmuch as the 
averments made by him in the affidavit are false 
and untrue. Under those circumstances, this Court 
refused to condone the delay of 332 days in filing a 
petition to set aside the exparte decree.
(v) In (Oriental Aroma Chemical Industries 
Limited vs. Gujarat Industrial Development 
Corporation and another) 2010 AIR SCW 1788 the 
Honourable Supreme Court rejected an application 
for condonation of delay of 4 years in filing an 
application to set aside an exparte decree on the 
ground that the explanation offered for condonation 
12/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
of delay is found to be not satisfied.
(vi) In the decision of this Court reported in 
(K.M. Balasubramaniam vs. C. Loganathan and 
another) 2011 (2) MWN (Civil) 741 this Court had 
an occasion to consider a case for condonation of 
delay of 1581 days in re-presenting an application 
to set aside the exparte decree. In that case, the 
suit was filed for recovery of money which was 
decreed exparte and the Execution Petition filed by 
the decree holder was also ordered exparte. 
Thereafter, the decree holder obtained sale 
certificate also and at the time of taking delivery of 
the property, the petitioner therein filed the 
application to condone the delay of 1581 days in 
setting aside the exparte decree. In that case also, 
a Petition under Section 47 of the CPC was filed 
stating that the decree is not execu table. In the 
above facts and circumstances, this Court held that 
the delay offered for condonation of delay is not 
proper and acceptable. In Para Nos. 18 and 19, it 
was held as follows:-
18. It is not in dispute that the suit was filed 
based on a pro-note dated 01.08.1999 and the ex 
parte decree was passed on 08.09.2004, nearly 7 
years back. It is an admitted fact that the Petitioner 
appeared in the suit as well as in the earlier E.P. 
No. 87 of 2005 through Counsel, however, the 
13/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
alleged petition filed under Order 9, Rule 13, C.P.C. 
to set aside the ex parte decree was not 
represented for more than four years and four 
months. Though arrest was ordered in the earlier 
E.P., however, as the petitioner evaded service, the 
E.P. was closed, then the present Execution Petition 
in E.P. No. 292 of 2006 was filed against the 
property belongs to the petitioner. Notice was 
served properly on the petitioner/judgment debtor 
and after proclamation of sale, property was sold in 
public auction. The successf ul bidder, a third party 
to the Suit paid the entire amount. As the sale was 
confirmed and Sale certificate was also issued, the 
amount deposited by the auction purchaser was 
withdrawn by the decree-holder by filing a petition 
before the Court below and full satisfaction was 
recorded. At this stage, the petitioner is not entitled 
to seek an order to condone the inordinate delay of 
1581 days in representing an unnumbered 
Application, seeking an order to set aside the 
exparte. It cannot be disputed that the length of 
delay is not a matter for deciding the petition filed 
under Section 5 of Limitation Act and rendering 
substantial justice is the paramount consideration.
19. In the instant case, it is clear that the 
Petitioner/Judgment Debtor has deliberately 
adopted delay tactics at various stages. Having 
14/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
appeared through Counsel in the earlier Execution 
Petition in E.P. No. 87 of 2005, evaded arrest and 
has not challenged various orders passed in the 
Execution Petitions has casually filed the Application 
before the court below to condone the delay in 
representing an Application filed under Order 9, 
Rule 13, C.P.C. and also filed a Petition under 
Section 47, C.P.C. which would show that it is an 
abuse of process of law, as argued by the learned 
counsel for the Respondents. On the aforesaid 
circumstances, I could find no merit in favour of the 
petitioner to allow the inordinate delay of 1581 
days in representing an unnumbered Application, 
seeking an order to set aside the ex parte decree. 
As found by the Court below, the inordinate delay 
has not been satisfactorily explained by the 
Petitioner herein. While deciding the Petition, this 
Court has to consider the substantial justice. I am 
of the view that allowing the petition would render 
only injustice to the Second respondent/auction 
purchaser, who was impleaded by the order of this 
Court in this Revision and the first 
respondent/decree holder, hence, to meed the ends 
of justice, the Civil Revision Petition is liable to be 
dismissed, as an abuse of process of law by the 
Petitioner herein."
(vii) In (Postmaster General and others vs. Living 
15/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
Media India Limited and another) (2012) 3 SCC 
563, the Honourable Supreme Court, while 
dismissing the application for condonation of delay 
of 427 days in filing the Special Leave Petition, held 
condonation of delay is not an excep tion and it 
should not be used as an anticipated benefit for the 
government departments. In that case, the 
Honourable Supreme Court held that unless the 
Department has reasonable and acceptable reason 
for the delay and there was bonafide effort, there is 
no need to accept the usual explanation that the 
file was kept pending for several months/years due 
to considerable degree of procedural red tape in the 
process cannot be accepted. In Para Nos. 25, 26, 
27, 28, and 29, the Honourable Supreme Court 
dealt with the scope of 'sufficient cause' and held as 
follows:-
25. We have already extracted the reasons as 
mentioned in the "better affidavit" sworn by Mr. 
Aparajeet Pattanayak, SSRM, Air Mail Sorting 
Division, New Delhi. It is relevant to note that in 
the said affidavit, the Department has itself 
mentioned and is aware of the date of the 
judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court in 
Office of the Chief Postmaster vs. Living Media 
Limited as 11.09.2009. Even according to the 
deponent, their counsel had applied for the certified 
16/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
copy of the said judgment only on 08.01.2010 and 
the same was received by the Department on the 
very same day. There is no explanation for not 
applying for the certified copy of the impugned 
judgment on 11.09.2009 or at least within a 
reasonable time. The fact remains that the certified 
copy was applied for only on 08.01.2010 i.e., after 
a period of nearly four months.
26. In spite of affording another opportunity 
to file better affidavit by placing adequate material, 
neither the Deponent nor the person-in-charge has 
filed any explanation for not applying the certified 
copy within the prescribed period. The other dates 
mentioned in the affidavit which we have already 
extracted, clearly show that there was delay at 
every stage and excep t mentioning the dates of 
receipt of the file and the decision taken, there is 
no explanation as to why such delay had 
occasioned. Though it was stated by the 
Department that the delay was due to unavoidable 
circumstances and genuine difficulties, the fact 
remains that from day one the Department or the 
person/persons concerned have not evinced 
diligence in prosecuting the matter to this Court by 
taking appropriate steps.
27. It is not in dispute that the person (s) 
concerned were well aware or conversant with the 
17/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
issues involved including the prescribed period of 
limitation for taking up the matter by way of filing a 
special leave petition in this Court. They cannot 
claim that they have a separate period of limitation 
when the Department was possessed  with 
competent persons familiar with court proceedings. 
In the absence of plausible and acceptable 
explanation, we are posing a question why the 
delay is to be condoned mechanically merely 
because the Government or a wing of the 
Government is a party before us. 
28. Though we are conscious of the fact that 
in a matter of condonation of delay when there was 
no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of 
bona fides, a liberal concession has to be adopted 
to advance substantial justice, we are of the view 
that in the facts and circumstances, the 
Department cannot take advantage of various 
earlier decisions. The claim on account of 
impersonal machinery and inherited bureaucratic 
methodology of making several notes cannot be 
accepted in view of the modern technologies being 
used and available. The law of limitation 
undoubtedly binds everybody, including the 
Government. 
29. In our view, it is the right time to inform 
all the government bodies, their agencies and 
18/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
instrumentalities that unless they have reasonable 
and acceptable explanation for the delay and there 
was bona fide effort, there is no need to accept the 
usual explanation that the file was kept pending for 
several months/years due to considerable degree of 
procedural red tape in the process. The government 
departments are under a special obligation to 
ensure that they perform their duties with diligence 
and commitment. Condonation of delay is an 
excep tion and should not be used as an anticipated 
benefit for the government departments. The law 
shelters everyone under the same light and should 
not be swirled for the benefit of a few."
11.In the case of Sundar Gnanaolivu Vs. 
Rajendran Gnanavolivu  reported in 
MANU/TN/2123/2003, the Division Bench made 
following observations;
“8. In the judgment reported in 
MANU/SC/01435/1998 : 1998 (2) CTC 533 (N. 
Balakrishnan versus M. Krishnamurthy), the 
position has been set out as under in para 14:
14. It must be remembered that in every case of 
delay there can be some lapse 'on the part of the 
litigant concerned.
That alone is not enough to turn down his plea and 
to shut the door against him. If the explanation 
19/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
does not smack of mala fides or it is put-forth as 
part of a dilatory strategy the court must show 
utmost consideration to the suitor. But when there 
is reasonable ground to think that the delay was 
occasioned by the party deliberately to gain time 
then the court should lean against acceptance of 
the explanation....
(Underlining is ours)
9. In the Judgment reported in 
MANU/SC/0398/2001 : 2001(6) SCC 176 M.K. 
Prasad versus P. Arumugam), it has been held as 
under in para 9.
9.Again in State of W.B. v. Administrator, Howrah 
Municipality and G. Ramegowda Major v. Special 
Land Acquisition Officer this Court observed that 
the expression "sufficient cause" in Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act must receive a liberal construction so 
as to advance substantial justice and generally 
delays be condoned in the interest of justice where 
gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of 
bona fides is not imputable to the party seeking 
condonation of delay. Law of limitation has been 
enacted to serve the interests of justice and not to 
defeat it. Again in N. Balakrishnan v. M. 
Krishnamurthy this Court held that acceptability of 
explanation for the delay is the sole criterion and 
20/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
length of delay is not relevant, in the absence of 
anything showing mala fide or deliberate delay as a 
dilatory tactic, the court should normally condone 
the delay....
(Underlining is ours)
10.In a recent Judgment of the Honourable 
Supreme Court reported in MANU/SC/0135/2002 : 
2002(3) SCC 195 = 2002-3-L.W.417 (Ram Nath 
Sao @ Ram Sahu & Others versus Gobardhan Sap 
& Others), the position has been succinctly set out 
in para 12 which reads as under:
12. ...Acceptance of explanation furnished should 
be the rule and refusal, an excep tion, more so 
when no negligence or inaction or want of bona 
fides can be imputed to the defaulting party. On the 
other hand, while considering the matter the courts 
should not lose sight of the fact that by not taking 
steps within the time prescribed a valuable right 
has accrued to the other party which should not be 
lightly defeated by condoning delay in a routine-like 
manner....
(Underlining is ours)
11. In the Division Bench Judgment of our High 
Court, in the Judgment reported in 
MANU/TN/0252/2000 : 2000 (3) CTC 727 = 2000 3 
L.W. 938 (C. Subraniam versus Tamil Nadu Housing 
21/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
Board rep. by its Chairman And Managing Director), 
the position has been stated as under in para 31:
31. To turn up the legal position, (1) the work 
"sufficient cause" should receive liberal construction 
to do substantial justice; (2) what is "sufficient 
cause" is a question of fact in a given 
circumstances of the case; (3) it is axiomatic that 
condonation of delay is discretion of the Court; (4) 
length of delay is no matter, but acceptability of the 
explanation is the only criterion' (5) once the Court 
accepts the explanation as "sufficient", it is the 
result of positive exercise of discretion and 
normally the superior court should not disturb in 
such finding unless the discretion was exercised on 
wholly untenable or perverse; (6) The rules of 
limitation are not meant to destroy the rights of the 
parties but they are meant to see that the parties 
do not resort to dilatory tactics to seek their 
remedy promptly; (7) Unless a party shows that 
he/she is put to manifest injustice or hardship, the' 
discretion exercised by the lower Court is not liable 
to be revised; (8) If the explanation does not 
smack of mala fides or it is put forth as part of a 
dilatory strategy, the court must show utmost 
consideration to the suitor; (9). If the delay was 
occasioned by party deliberately to gain time, then 
the court should lean against acceptance of the 
22/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
explanation and while condoning the delay, the 
Court should not forget the opposite party 
altogether.
13. In yet another Division Bench Judgment 
reported in 1990 (1) LLN 457 (Tamil Nadu 
Mercantile Bank Ltd. Tuticorin versus Appellate 
Authority Under The Tamil Nadu Shops And 
Establishments Act, Madurai And Another), the 
principles relating to rule of limitation have been 
discussed and the legal position has been stated by 
His Lordship Mr. Justice M. Srinivasan, as he then 
was, in paragraphs 14 and 17 which read as under:
14. ...If a litigant chooses to approach the Court 
long after the time prescribed under the relevant 
provisions of the law, he cannot say that no 
prejudice would be caused to the other side by the 
delay being condoned. The other side would have in 
all probability destroyed the records thinking that 
the records would not be relevant as there was no 
further proceeding in the matter. Hence to view a 
matter of condonation of delay with a 
presupposition that no prejudice will be caused by 
the condonation of delay to the respondent in that 
application will be fallacious. In our view, each case 
has to be decided on the facts and circumstances of 
the case. Length of the delay is a relevant matter 
23/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
to be taken into account while considering whether 
the delay should be condoned or not. It is not open 
to any litigant to fix his own period of limitation for 
instituting proceedings for which law has prescribed 
periods of limitation.
17. ...Once it is held that a party has lost his right 
to have the matter considered on merits because of 
his own inaction for a long time, it cannot be 
presumed to be non-deliberate delay, and in such 
circumstances of the case, he cannot be heard to 
plead that substantial justice deserved to be 
preferred as against technical considerations. We 
are of the view that the question of limitation is not 
merely a technical consideration. Rules of limitation 
are based on principles of sound public policy and 
principles of equity. Is a litigant liable to have a 
Damocles' sword hanging over his head indefinitely 
for a period to be determined at the whims and 
fancies of the opponent?
(Underlining is ours)
14. On a conspectus reading of the above principles 
set out in the various judgments, it is well settled 
that a liberal approach should be extended while 
considering the application for condonation of 
delay. Sufficient caution has been exhibited to note 
that wherever there is lack of bona fides or attempt 
24/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
to hood-wink the Court by the party concerned who 
has come forward with an application for 
condonation of delay, in such cases, no indulgence 
should be shown by condoning the delay applied 
for. It is also clear to the effect that it is not the 
number of days of delay that matters, but the 
attitude of the party which caused the delay. In 
other words when the Court finds that the party 
who failed to approach the Court within the time 
stipulated comes forward with an explanation for 
condoning the delay, the Court if satisfied that the 
delay occasioned not due to the deliberate conduct 
of the party, but due to any other reason, then by 
sufficiently compensating the prejudice caused to 
the other side monetarily, the condonation of delay 
can be favorably ordered.
The Division Bench in the above said case made an 
observation that a liberal approach should be 
extended while considering the application for 
condonation of delay. Sufficient caution has been 
exhibited to note that wherever there is a lack of 
bonafides or attempt to hoodwink the Court by the 
party concerned who has come forward with an 
application for condonation of delay, in such cases, 
no indulgence should be shown by condoning the 
delay applied for. It is observed that question of 
limitation is not merely a technical consideration 
25/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
but based on principles of sound public policy as 
well as equity and that a litigant cannot be 
expected to have Damocles' sword hanging over his 
had indefinitely for a period to be determined at the 
whims and fancies of the opponent.
12. Thus, the Courts have taken a clear view that 
the intention of the parties in filing appeal belatedly 
after causing prejudice to the interest of the other 
parties, then also the delay cannot be condoned by 
exercising the power of discretion. Therefore all 
these aspects are to be considered. Mechanical or 
routine approach is impermissible, may be 
permissible in respect of the delay of short span 
and not otherwise. 
13. In the case of Lanka Venkateswarlu (D) by 
L.R.s Vs. State of A.P. & others reported in 
MANU/SC/0153/2011, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court made an observation as follows;
“20. In the case of M. Balakrishnan (supra), 
this Court again reiterated the principle that rules 
of limitation are not meant to destroy the rights of 
parties. They are meant to see that the parties do 
not resort to dilatory tactics, but seek their remedy 
promptly.
21 to 25.........
26.We are at a loss to fathom any logic or 
rationale, which could have impelled the High Court 
26/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
to condone the delay after holding the same to be 
unjustifiable. The concepts such as "liberal 
approach", "justice oriented approach", "substantial 
justice" can not be employed to jettison the 
substantial law of limitation. Especially, in cases 
where the Court concludes that there is no 
justification for the delay. In our opinion, the 
approach adopted by the High Court tends to show 
the absence of judicial balance and restraint, which 
a Judge is required to maintain whilst adjudicating 
any lis between the parties. We are rather pained 
to notice that in this case, not being satisfied with 
the use of mere intemperate language, the High 
Court resorted to blatant sarcasms.
The use of unduly strong intemperate or 
extravagant language in a judgment has been 
repeatedly disapproved by this Court in a number 
of cases. Whilst considering applications for 
condonation of delay under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act, the Courts do not enjoy unlimited 
and unbridled discretionary powers. All 
discretionary powers, especially judicial powers, 
have to be exercised within reasonable bounds, 
known to the law. The discretion has to be 
exercised in a systematic manner informed by 
reason. Whims or fancies; prejudices or 
predilections can not and should not form the basis 
27/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
of exercising discretionary powers."
14. In the case of Pundlik Jalam Patil (D) by 
Lrs. Vs. Exe.Eng.Jalgaon Medium Project & 
others reported in  MANU/SC/4694/2004, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as follows:
“15. In Ajit Singh Thakur Singh and anr. vs. 
State of Gujarat [ (1981) 1 SCC 495 ] this court 
observed :
"It is true that a party is entitled to wait until the 
last day of limitation for filing an appeal. But when 
it allows limitation to expire and pleads sufficient 
cause for not filing the appeal earlier, the sufficient 
cause must establish that because of some event or 
circumstance arising before limitation expired it was 
not possible to file the appeal within time. No event 
or circumstance arising after the expiry of limitation 
can constitute sufficient cause."
(Emphasis supplied) This judgment squarely applies 
to the facts in hand.
17. Shri Mohta, learned senior counsel relying 
on the decision of this court in N. Balakrishnan vs. 
M.Krishnamurthy [(1998) 7 SCC 123] submitted 
that length of delay is no matter, acceptability of 
explanation is the only criterion. It was submitted 
that if the explanation offered does not smack of 
mala fides or it is not put forth as part of dilatory 
tactics the court must show utmost consideration to 
28/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
the suitor. The very said decision upon which 
reliance has been placed holds that the law of 
limitation fixes a life span for every legal remedy 
for the redress of the legal injury suffered. 
Unending period for launching the remedy may lead 
to unending uncertainty and consequential anarchy. 
The law of Limitation is thus founded on public 
policy. The decision does not lay down that a 
lethargic litigant can leisurely choose his own time 
in preferring appeal or application as the case may 
be. On the other hand, in the said judgment it is 
said that court should not forget the opposite party 
altogether. It is observed:
"It is enshrined in the maxim interest reipublicae up 
sit finis litium ( it is for the general welfare that a 
period be put to litigation). Rules of limitation are 
not meant to destroy the rights of the parties. They 
are meant to see that parties do not resort to 
dilatory tactics but seek their remedy promptly. The 
idea is that every legal remedy must be kept alive 
for a legislatively fixed period of time."
18. In Ramlal and others vs. Rewa Coalfields 
Ltd. [ AIR 1962 SC 361], this court held that: "in 
construing Section 5 of the Limitation Act, it is 
relevant to bear in mind two important 
considerations. The first consideration is that the 
expiration of period of limitation prescribed for 
29/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
making an appeal gives rise to right in favour of the 
decree holder to treat the decree as binding 
between the parties and this legal right which has 
accrued to the decree holder by lapse of time 
should not be light heartedly disturbed. The other 
consideration which cannot be ignored is that if 
sufficient cause of excusing delay is shown 
discretion is given to the court to condone the delay 
and admit the appeal. `It is further necessa ry to 
emphasis that even if the sufficient cause has been 
shown a party is not entitled to the condonation of 
delay in question as a matter of right. The proof of 
a sufficient cause is a condition precedent for the 
exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction vested in 
the court by section 5. This aspect of the matter 
naturally introduces the consideration of all relevant 
facts and it is at this stage the diligence of the 
party of its bona fides may fall for consideration." 
On the facts and in the circumstances, we are of 
the opinion that the respondent beneficiary was not 
diligent in availing the remedy of appeal. The 
averments made in the application seeking 
condonation of delay in filing appeals do not show 
any acceptable cause much less sufficient cause to 
exercise courts' discretion in its favour."
15. In the case of Esha Bhattacharjee Vs. 
Managing Commit tee of Raghunathpur Nafar 
30/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
Academy  & Others  reported in 
MANU/SC/0932/2013, the Hon’ble Apex Court of 
India made an observation as follows: 
“15. From the aforesaid authorities the principles 
that can broadly be culled out are:
i) There should be a liberal, pragmatic, justice-
oriented, non- pedantic approach while dealing with 
an application for condonation of delay, for the 
courts are not supposed to legalise injustice but are 
obliged to remove injustice.
ii) The terms sufficient cause should be understood 
in their proper spirit, philosophy and purpose 
regard being had to the fact that these terms are 
basically elastic and are to be applied in proper 
perspective to the obtaining fact- situation.
iii) Substantial justice being paramount and pivotal 
the technical considerations should not be given 
undue and uncalled for emphasis.
iv) No presumption can be attached to deliberate 
causation of delay but, gross negligence on the part 
of the counsel or litigant is to be taken note of.
v) Lack of bona fides imputable to a party seeking 
condonation of delay is a significant and relevant
fact.
vi) It is to be kept in mind that adherence to strict 
proof should not affect public justice and cause 
public mischief because the courts are required to 
31/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
be vigilant so that in the ultimate eventuate there is 
no real failure of justice.
vii) The concept of liberal approach has to 
encapsule the conception of reasonableness and it 
cannot be allowed a totally unfettered free play. 
viii) There is a distinction between inordinate delay 
and a delay of short duration or few days, for to the 
former doctrine of prejudice is attracted whereas to 
the latter it may not be attracted. That apart, the 
first one warrants strict approach whereas the 
second calls for a liberal delineation.
ix) The conduct, behaviour and attitude of a party 
relating to its inaction or negligence are relevant 
factors to be taken into consideration. It is so as 
the  fundamental principle is that the courts are 
required to weigh the scale of balance of justice in 
respect of both parties and the said principle cannot 
be given a total go by in the name of liberal 
approach.
x) If the explanation offered is concocted or the 
grounds urged in the application are fanciful, the 
courts should be vigilant not to expose the other 
side unnecessa rily to face such a litigation.
xi) It is to be borne in mind that no one gets away 
with fraud, misrepresentation or interpolation by 
taking recourse to the technicalities of law of 
limitation.
32/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
xii) The entire gamut of facts are to be carefully 
scrutinized and the approach should be based on 
the paradigm of judicial discretion which is founded 
on objective reasoning and not on individual 
perception.
xiii) The State or a public body or an entity 
representing a collective cause should be given 
some acceptable latitude.
16. To the aforesaid principles we may add 
some more guidelines taking note of the present 
day scenario. They are: -
a) An application for condonation of delay should be 
drafted with careful concern and not in a half 
hazard manner harbouring the notion that the 
courts are required to condone delay on the 
bedrock of the principle that adjudication of a lis on 
merits is seminal to justice dispensation system.
b) An application for condonation of delay should 
not be dealt with in a routine manner on the base
of individual philosophy which is basically 
subjective.
c) Though no precise formula can be laid down 
regard being had to the concept of judicial 
discretion, yet a conscious effort for achieving 
consistency and collegiality of the adjudicatory 
system should be made as that is the ultimate 
33/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
institutional motto.
d) The increasing tendency to perceive delay as a 
non- serious matter and, hence, lackadaisical 
propensity can be exhibited in a non-challant 
manner requires to be curbed, of course, within 
legal parameters."
It is very important to consider the judgement of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Esha 
Bhattacharjee, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court 
laid down certain principles which were culled out 
particularly and those principles are the guiding 
principles for the purpose of deciding the petitions 
filed to condone the delay. The above principles, 
cited supra reveals that the concept of liberal 
approach has to encapsule the conception of 
reasonableness and it cannot be allowed totally to 
unfettered free play.
16. The concepts such as “liberal approach”, 
“justice oriented approach”, “substantial justice” 
cannot be employed in jettison the substantial law 
of limitation. The law of limitation is substantial and 
therefore the principles laid down is to be 
scrupulously followed while condoning the delay 
under the law of limitation. The limitation has got a 
specific purpose and object and more specifically to 
34/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
avoid prejudice to the respective parties. In the 
event of prolongation or protraction of the 
litigation, undoubtedly and for an unspecified period 
when the specific law of limitation has got a specific 
purpose and object, then the power of discretion is 
to be exercised cautiously. Power of discretion 
cannot be exercised in the absence of any valid 
reason. In other words, powers can be exercised 
for the purpose of passing orders only by recording 
reasons which must be candid and convincing and 
must be passed on certain sound legal principles. 
Therefore, recording of reasons for exercising 
discretionary powers is one of the elementary 
principles of law. In the event of exercising 
discretionary powers without recording reasons, 
undoubtedly the same would cause not only 
prejudice and will set a bad principle and therefore, 
the Courts must be cautious while exercising power 
of discretion more specifically in such matters 
where the law of Limitation is substantial.”
7.In view of the facts and circumstances, this Court has no 
hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the petitioner has not 
established any acceptable ground for the purpose of condoning the 
huge delay of 1435 days in filing the Appeal Suit and consequently, 
S.M.SUBRAMANIAM.,J
35/36
http://www.judis.nic.in
C.M.P.No.443  of 2019
mrm
C.M.P.No.443 of 2019 stands dismissed and A.S.SR.No.123666 of 2018 
stands rejected. No costs.
12.12.2019
mrm
Index : Yes
Internet:Yes
Speaking Order
To
City Civil Court at Chennai
C.M.P.No.443 of 2019
in
A.S.SR.No.123666 of 2018
36/36
http://www.judis.nic.in